Preliminary estimates place the amount of damage that Hurricane Irma caused in the US at a minimum of $50 billion. Hurricane Irma affected multiple states in the South, notably Florida. Except for the Florida Keys, the total damage it caused was not as great as government officials and forecasters had warned. The Florida Keys suffered the worst of the damage in the US. After surveying the aftermath of Irma, Florida governor Rick Scott said "I thought we would see more damage" on the mainland but said "he witnessed devastation in the Keys". Hurricane Irma weakened after making landfall in Cuba, but strengthened back into a Category 4 prior to hitting the Keys. President Donald Trump commented on Twitter that the devastation in some places was "far greater than anyone thought".

At least 90 people died throughout the United States in relation to Hurricane Irma: 82 in Florida, 5 in South Carolina, and 3 in Georgia.
Florida
Light pole with lamp torn away and landing about 50 feet away. Corner of Washington Avenue and Lincoln Lane, Miami Beach

Throughout Florida, at least 82 people died in storm-related incidents. The majority of deaths occurred from drowning, trauma, and carbon monoxide poisoning. At least 12 people died throughout the Florida Keys. One death occurred during preparations when a man fell off a ladder, while installing hurricane shutters in Davie. Another death occurred in a traffic accident in tropical storm force winds in Monroe County. A man in Coconut Grove died while riding out the storm on his houseboat. Three deaths occurred in Polk County. In the hurricane's aftermath, lack of power and possible criminal negligence led to 14 deaths at The Rehabilitation Center at Hollywood Hills, a Hollywood nursing home. The patients died from sweltering heat worsened by the lack of air conditioning.
Hurricane Irma on September 10, right before landfall on Florida. Hurricane Jose can be seen to the lower right.

After crossing the Straits of Florida and being upgraded to a Category 4 hurricane, initial landfall took place at Cudjoe Key at 9:10 am. EDT on September 10, where an estimated 10 ft (3 m) storm surge occurred during the afternoon. In the Keys, the hurricane caused major damage to buildings, trailer parks, boats, roads, the electricity supply, mobile phone coverage, internet access, sanitation, the water supply and the fuel supply. Key West, Sugarloaf Key, Summerland Key, Ramrod Key, Little Torch Key, Big Pine Key and Marathon were also flooded by storm surge, and tornadoes were reported at Sugarloaf Key.
Boats washed up on U.S. Route 1 in Florida

A second landfall was made, as a Category 3 hurricane, at Marco Island at 3:35 pm. EDT the same day. A 7 ft (2.1 m) storm surge occurred in Naples, which Irma passed over as a Category 2 hurricane after being downgraded at 5 pm. EDT. Part of Tampa Bay (at Hillsborough Bay) was drained in a reverse storm surge caused by strong offshore winds, prior to the arrival of the eye of the hurricane. Sarasota Bay was also drained, resulting in the stranding of two manatees which were then rescued. The hurricane was downgraded to Category 1, prior to reaching Tampa.

Away from the path of the eye, a wind gust of 109 mph (175 km/h) was recorded in Pembroke Pines. In Miami, storm surge inundated Brickell Avenue with waist-deep water, and two high-rise tower cranes collapsed. A further construction crane collapsed in Fort Lauderdale. There were sporadic reports of looting and burglaries at several Miami Metro area businesses with the theft of non-essential items such as sports apparel and athletic shoes during the height of the storm. In Jacksonville, flooding surpassed the record set by Hurricane Dora.
File:Overflight of Jacksonville, Florida, after Hurricane Irma.webmPlay media
Overflight of Jacksonville, Florida, after Hurricane Irma

At 1:00 pm. EDT, on September 10, almost 730,000 customers were without power in Miami-Dade County alone, with almost 500,000 without power in Broward County, over 225,000 out in Palm Beach County, and in total approximately 1,572,000 customers were without power across the state. As of 6:41 pm. EDT on September 10 over 2.6 million homes in Florida were without power. Air traffic was reduced; at one point on September 10, there were no airliners over Florida.

In the days after the hurricane, due to the heavy rainfall, numerous rivers had flooded their surrounding land, including residential areas. Public health risks, such as diarrheal infections and mosquito-borne illnesses, remain from the flooding that resulted in the aftermath of the hurricane. A large concern from flooding is contamination because people become exposed to dirty floodwaters and the potential for contaminated water to get into the local water supply is significant. One example of an illness that can get into the water supply is leptospirosis, which is caused by rat urine being in the floodwaters. If people are exposed to leptospirosis and do not get treatment, it can cause kidney damage, meningitis, and liver failure. Noroviruses and other infections are also a risk.
Other states

Three deaths were reported in Georgia due to falling trees and debris, along with widespread wind damage and power outages throughout the state primarily due to fallen trees. On Tybee Island, the storm surge caused extensive flooding.

In Charleston, South Carolina, the third highest storm surge on record was recorded, reaching a height of approximately 10 ft (3 m). By of September 12, almost 100,000 had lost power in Upstate South Carolina. Five people died in storm-related incidents across South Carolina, all from indirect incidents.

Light damage occurred in other areas, including Tennessee. About 75,000 customers in North Carolina lost power due to Irma.